
--- Page 1 ---
 
 
MQ-A2-engb 1/2016 (1020) 
 
Mergers and 
Acquisitions 
Professor Alexander Roberts 
Dr William Wallace 
Dr Peter Moles 

--- Page 2 ---
 
This course text is part of the learning content for this Edinburgh Business School course. 
In addition to this printed course text, you should also have access to the course website in this subject, 
which will provide you with more learning content, the Profiler software and past examination questions 
and answers. 
The content of this course text is updated from time to time, and all changes are reflected in the version 
of the text that appears on the accompanying website at http://coursewebsites.ebsglobal.net/. 
Most updates are minor, and examination questions will avoid any new or significantly altered material for 
two years following publication of the relevant material on the website. 
You can check the version of the course text via the version release number to be found on the front 
page of the text, and compare this to the version number of the latest PDF version of the text on the 
website. 
If you are studying this course as part of a tutored programme, you should contact your Centre for 
further information on any changes. 
Full terms and conditions that apply to students on any of the Edinburgh Business School courses are 
available on the website www.ebsglobal.net, and should have been notified to you either by Edinburgh 
Business School or by the centre or regional partner through whom you purchased your course. If this is 
not the case, please contact Edinburgh Business School at the address below: 
  
Edinburgh Business School 
Heriot-Watt University 
 
Edinburgh 
 
EH14 4AS 
 
United Kingdom 
  
Tel  + 44 (0) 131 451 3090 
 
Fax  + 44 (0) 131 451 3002 
 
Email  enquiries@ebs.hw.ac.uk 
 
Website  www.ebsglobal.net 
 
The courses are updated on a regular basis to take account of errors, omissions and recent 
developments. If you'd like to suggest a change to this course, please contact 
us: comments@ebs.hw.ac.uk. 

--- Page 3 ---
 
Mergers and Acquisitions 
Professor Alexander Roberts PhD, MBA, FCCA, FCIS, MCIBS. 
Professor Roberts lectures, researches, and consults for major organisations on strategy development 
and implementation and related issues. The practical relevance of his work is underpinned by 15 years in 
senior management, including 10 years at executive director level within multinational subsidiaries of 
American- and European-based businesses. His work experience includes making mergers and acquisi-
tions work in practice. Professor Roberts gained his PhD from the London Business School in 1997. He 
has extensive executive and postgraduate management development experience. Professor Roberts 
founded the Doctorate in Business Administration (DBA) in Strategic Focus programme at EBS. Professor 
Roberts is also author/co-author of several MBA/DBA distance learning texts.  
Dr William Wallace BSc (Hons), MSc, PhD 
DBA Programme Director and Senior Teaching Fellow, Edinburgh Business School (EBS), the Graduate 
School of Business at Heriot-Watt University. 
Dr William Wallace holds degrees from Leeds Metropolitan University (1981), Loughborough University 
(1983) and Heriot-Watt University (1987). He joined Edinburgh Business School in 2000 after 10 years’ 
project management experience in the UK public and private sectors. Dr Wallace is author of the EBS 
DBA texts Project Management and Alliances and Partnerships. He is joint author of Strategic Risk Manage-
ment and Mergers and Acquisitions. He is also either author or joint author of the EBS DBA texts 
Introduction to Business Research 1–3. He is Chair of the EBS DBA Research Committee and has successful-
ly mentored and supervised numerous EBS DBA students. 
Dr Peter Moles MA, MBA, PhD. 
Peter Moles is a finance lecturer at the University of Edinburgh Management School, where he teaches 
elements of finance on a number of undergraduate, postgraduate and professional programmes. His 
research interests are in risk management, principally financial risk management, and corporate decision-
making, including problems in currency management and in the management of financial distress. He took 
up his post following a career in the City working for a number of banks, latterly for Chase Investment 
Bank, in the international capital markets. His last major post was analysing treasury management 
processes for corporate clients. He is the author of Edinburgh Business School’s MBA distance learning 
text on Financial Risk Management and is joint author of the Handbook of International Financial Terms, 
published by Oxford University Press.  

--- Page 4 ---
 
First Published in Great Britain in 2003. 
© Roberts, Wallace, Moles 2003, 2010  
The rights of Professor Alexander Roberts, Dr William Wallace and Dr Peter Moles to be identified as 
Authors of this Work has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
All rights reserved; no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise 
without the prior written permission of the Publishers. This book may not be lent, resold, hired out or 
otherwise disposed of by way of trade in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is 
published, without the prior consent of the Publishers. 

--- Page 5 ---
 
 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
v 
Contents 
Preface 
 
 
ix 
The Multidisciplinary Approach 
xi 
Gaining a Swift Overview 
xi 
 
Introduction 
 
 
xiii 
Philosophy 
xiv 
 
List of 
Abbreviations 
 
 
xvi 
Module 1 
Introduction 
1/1
 
1.1 
The Concept of Mergers and Acquisitions 
1/2 
1.2 
Why Companies Merge and Acquire 
1/4 
1.3 
Integration and Conglomeration 
1/8 
1.4 
The Merger and Acquisition Lifecycle 
1/10 
1.5 
Measuring the Success of Mergers and Acquisitions 
1/14 
1.6 
A Brief History of Mergers and Acquisitions 
1/17 
Learning Summary 
1/19 
Review Questions 
1/24 
 
  
Module 2 
Strategic Focus 
2/1
 
2.1 
Introduction 
2/1 
2.2 
Some Common Questions about Mergers and Acquisitions 
2/3 
2.3 
Some Common Misconceptions about Mergers and Acquisitions 
2/8 
2.4 
Business Strategy and Corporate Strategy 
2/12 
2.5 
National and International Regulators 
2/37 
2.6 
The Concept of Strategic Focus 
2/40 
2.7 
Aligning Focus With Performance 
2/45 
2.8 
Change and Strategic Drift 
2/60 
2.9 
Characteristics Mapping 
2/88 
Learning Summary 
2/107 
Review Questions 
2/115 
 
  
Module 3 
Why Mergers Fail 
3/1
 
3.1 
Introduction 
3/1 
3.2
Some Common Questions about Mergers and Acquisitions 
3/2

--- Page 6 ---
Contents 
vi 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
3.3 
Some Common Misconceptions 
3/5 
3.4 
Merger Failure Drivers 
3/7 
3.5 
The Development of a Process Model 
3/49 
3.6 
Characteristics of a Successful Merger 
3/56 
3.7 
Rules for Avoiding an Unsuccessful Merger 
3/58 
Learning Summary 
3/59 
Review Questions 
3/63 
 
  
Module 4 
Valuation 
4/1 
 
4.1 
Introduction 
4/2 
4.2 
Why Firms Merge 
4/4 
4.3 
Valuation Methods 
4/12 
4.4 
Growth Opportunities 
4/36 
Learning Summary 
4/48 
4.5 
Appendix 1: Determining Cash Flows from Accounting Numbers 
4/52 
4.6 
Appendix 2: Accounting Treatment of Acquisitions 
4/56 
4.7 
Appendix 3: Tax Depreciation 
4/58 
Bibliography 
4/60 
Review Questions 
4/60 
 
  
Module 5 
Bid Tactics 
5/1 
 
5.1 
Introduction 
5/2 
5.2 
Bidding and Resisting as a Game 
5/11 
5.3 
Offensive and Defensive Tactics 
5/15 
5.4 
Northern Electric Case Study 
5/38 
Learning Summary 
5/48 
Bibliography 
5/50 
Review Questions 
5/51 
 
  
Module 6 
Due Diligence 
6/1 
 
6.1 
Introduction 
6/2 
6.2 
Critical Value Drivers 
6/10 
6.3 
The Value of New Information 
6/17 
6.4 
Due Diligence Checklists 
6/23 
6.5 
Materiality 
6/25 
6.6 
Sampling 
6/28 
Learning Summary 
6/37 
Bibliography 
6/40 
Review Questions
6/40 

--- Page 7 ---
 
Contents 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
vii
 
  
Module 7 
The Concept of Implementation 
7/1
 
7.1 
Introduction 
7/1 
7.2 
Some Common Questions about Merger Implementation 
7/2 
7.3 
Some Common Misconceptions about Merger Implementation 
7/6 
7.4 
The General Concept of Implementation 
7/10 
7.5 
Identifying Synergies 
7/14 
7.6 
The Implementation Process 
7/21 
7.7 
Implementation Risk Management 
7/39 
7.8 
The Concept of Disintegration and Reintegration 
7/52 
7.9 
Managerial Levers 
7/54 
7.10 
Transformation Tools 
7/57 
Review Questions 
7/73 
 
  
Module 8 
Project Management as a Tool for Managing the Implementation  
Process 
8/1
 
8.1 
Introduction 
8/1 
8.2 
Some Common Questions about Project Management 
8/3 
8.3 
Some Common Misconceptions about Project Management 
8/6 
8.4 
The Overall Implementation Process 
8/8 
8.5 
Project Management 
8/17 
8.6 
Project Management as a Tool for Managing the Overall Acquisition or  
Merger Process 
8/50 
Learning Summary 
8/69 
Review Questions 
8/84 
 
  
Module 9 
Developing the Implementation Plan 
9/1
 
9.1 
Introduction 
9/1 
9.2 
Some Common Questions about Implementation Planning 
9/3 
9.3 
Some Common Misconceptions about Implementation Planning 
9/6 
9.4 
The Concept of the Implementation Strategic Project Plan 
9/9 
9.5 
Project Aims and Objectives and Preliminaries 
9/14 
9.6 
Merger Team and Human Issues 
9/16 
9.7 
Merger Contracts and Procurement 
9/46 
9.8 
Project Schedule and Cost Plan 
9/58 
9.9 
Resources 
9/80 
9.10 
The Implementation Risk Management System 
9/83 
Learning Summary 
9/105 
Review Questions 
9/123

--- Page 8 ---
Contents 
viii 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
 
  
Module 10 
Executing the Implementation Plan 
10/1 
 
10.1 
Introduction 
10/1 
10.2 
Some Common Questions about Plan Execution 
10/2 
10.3 
Some Common Misconceptions about Plan Execution 
10/6 
10.4 
Monitoring and Control 
10/9 
10.5 
Achieving Integration 
10/12 
10.6 
Achieving Synergies 
10/17 
10.7 
Common Problem Areas and Tactical Responses 
10/20 
Learning Summary 
10/65 
Review Questions 
10/74 
 
  
Appendix 1 
Practice Final Examinations 
A1/1 
Final Practice Examination 
1/2 
Examination Answers 
1/6 
 
  
Appendix 2 
Statistical Tables 
A2/1 
Appendix 3 
Examination Formula Sheet 
A3/1 
Appendix 4 
Answers to Review Questions 
A4/1 
Module 1 
4/1 
Module 2 
4/2 
Module 3 
4/4 
Module 4 
4/5 
Module 5 
4/25 
Module 6 
4/37 
Module 7 
4/51 
Module 8 
4/53 
Module 9 
4/54 
Module 10 
4/56 
 
  
Index 
 
I/1 

--- Page 9 ---
 
 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
ix
Preface 
An understanding of mergers and acquisitions as a discipline is increasingly im-
portant in modern business. A glance at any business newspaper or business news 
web page will indicate that mergers and acquisitions are big business and are taking 
place all the time. Some sectors, such as finance, oil, pharmaceuticals, telecommuni-
cations, IT and chemicals, have been transformed since 1994 by the occurrence of 
very large-scale mergers and acquisitions. The sums of money involved in the really 
big mergers are truly astronomical. For example, the acquisition of the German 
company Mannesmann by the UK company Vodafone in 2000 was valued at $183 
billion. This deal created by far the largest company listed on the London Stock 
Exchange, and the fourth largest company in the world. The Vodafone–Mannesman 
deal overshadowed other recent large-scale deals including AOL-Time – Warner 
($181 billion), MCWorld.com – Sprint ($127 billion), Pfizer – Warner Lambert ($88 
billion) and Exxon-Mobil ($86 billion). These are enormous sums of money by any 
standards. 
Mergers and acquisitions also take place in relation to much smaller transactions. 
In an increasing number of countries mergers are now occurring between public 
sector organisations in areas such as universities and hospital trusts. The indications 
are that this high level of interest in mergers and acquisitions will continue and if 
anything increase. As technology continues to develop, and as deregulation and 
globalisation evolve, the old barriers to trade and national influence become less and 
less of an obstruction to international trade. In this context, mergers and acquisi-
tions are likely to become an even more important consideration in strategic 
planning and strategy implementation in the future. 
In an article in the Harvard Business Review, Joe Bower suggested that most mer-
gers and acquisitions fail. He said that there is a great deal written about mergers and 
acquisitions, although these writings are largely opinions and are based on one-off 
cases from which general rules cannot be reliably determined. 
In the Edinburgh Business School (EBS) approach, mergers and acquisitions as a 
discipline are closely related to the Strategic Focus Wheel™ as developed by Professor 
Alex Roberts. Mergers and acquisitions represent a major source of organisational 
change. In relation to change, organisations that can identify the need for change, 
design the changes required and implement these changes more effectively and 
efficiently than others are more likely to survive and prosper. Those that cannot 
adapt to change are likely to perish. The Strategic Focus Wheel™ was developed by 
Professor Alex Roberts to address these issues. 
The Strategic Focus Wheel™ covers four interrelated areas as shown below. These 
four areas form the basis for separate Edinburgh Business School distance learning 
texts and for the core of the EBS Doctor of Business Administration (DBA) in 
Strategic Focus programme. 

--- Page 10 ---
Preface 
x 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
 
The Strategic Focus Wheel™ 
© A. Roberts and A. MacLennon 2002 
The wheel is used to focus the efforts and resources of organisations on delivering 
their intended strategic objectives, and has four core elements. 
 Strategic planning revolves around identifying the options available to an 
organisation and selecting the most appropriate. If the strategic position selected 
is poor or inappropriate, even the best implementation capability is unlikely to 
compensate. 
 Making strategies work is a process for connecting the high-level strategic plan 
to the day-to-day activities that are critical to its delivery. 
 Project management of change ensures completeness and control over the 
physical realisation of the chosen strategy. Project management provides a com-
prehensive set of tools and techniques that enable managers to plan and 
implement change effectively and increase the likelihood of achieving the various 
objectives of the change process. 
 Strategic risk management concerns the identification, monitoring and 
management of the risk profile of the organisation. Strategic risk management 
covers four primary risk areas or levels. These are strategic risk, change or project risk, 
operational risk and unforeseeable risk. 
The complete Strategic Focus Wheel offers a representation of some approaches and 
tool sets that can assist in achieving and maintaining strategic focus. The EBS text in 
Mergers and Acquisitions is one of a series of new advanced-level integrated texts that 
have been developed in conjunction with the Strategic Focus Wheel. In implementing a 
major merger or acquisition the wheel functions can be used to plan the merger or 
acquisition and then make the transition work. The immediate and likely long-term 
performance of the transition can be monitored using strategic risk management 
tools and techniques. Where specific risks are identified and classified, project 
management can be used as a correctional tool for reducing the risk to a level where 
the residual element poses little threat to successful implementation. 
Strategic Planning
Making
Strategies
Work
Project Management
of Change
Strategic
Risk
Management
Strategic
Focus Wheel 

--- Page 11 ---
 
Preface 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
xi
The terms ‘merger’ and ‘acquisition’ are used interchangeably throughout the 
text. Setting the ownership issues to one side, the other characteristics, such as 
strategic logic, valuation, due diligence and implementation, remain similar. 
The Multidisciplinary Approach 
Mastery of mergers and acquisitions entails using skills from a wide range of 
management disciplines. It could be that many mergers and acquisitions fail because 
the managers leading them have an insufficient breadth of skills and/or experience. 
In mastering this text readers will have to call upon many disciplines encountered in 
the core MBA courses. In order to evaluate the strategic logic of a merger or 
acquisition, readers will need to think like a strategist. The basics of the Strategic 
Planning course are extended to encompass focus and characteristics mapping. 
Having evaluated the strategic logic, readers will then be challenged to put a value 
on the proposed merger or acquisition transaction and, therefore, will need to think 
like a financier, drawing on the knowledge acquired during the Finance course. Last, 
but by no means least, readers will be challenged to implement (make it work in 
practice) the proposed merger or acquisition, drawing on the knowledge acquired in 
the Project Management and Strategic Risk Management courses.  
In Mergers and Acquisitions, readers are challenged to think in an integrated man-
ner; like a strategist, financier and project manager, but all at the same time. Few 
functional managers, with the possible exception of a few CEOs and general 
managers, are called upon to apply such a wide range of disciplines simultaneously 
in an integrated manner. It is, however, our observation that many people who lead 
mergers and acquisitions in practice come from a single functional background. This 
may be part of the explanation for many of the failures in mergers and acquisitions, 
and for the recent rise of specialist merger and acquisition project management 
consultancies, particularly in the US. 
As would be expected, there is some overlap between the Mergers and Acquisi-
tions text and the basic MBA courses, particularly the courses in Strategic Planning 
and Finance. There is also some overlap with the courses in Project Management 
and Strategic Risk Management. Such overlaps are, however, considered in the 
specific context of mergers and acquisitions. 
Gaining a Swift Overview 
Readers have many different learning styles. Some readers prefer to study a stage at 
a time in depth. Others prefer to read through the text, develop an overview and 
then fill in the specific detail over a period of time. For readers who fall into the 
second category it is recommended that they first read the frequently asked ques-
tions and common misconceptions at the beginning of each module and the module 
summaries at the end of each module.  
Note also that this text is concerned with risk management from a generic point 
of view. The text does not refer specifically to financial risk management as there 

--- Page 12 ---
Preface 
xii 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
are already two appropriate Edinburgh Business School distance learning texts: 
Financial Risk Management 1 and Financial Risk Management 2. 
Mergers and Acquisitions is an integrated text. Most textbooks on mergers and ac-
quisitions concentrate on one aspect of the process, such as the financial aspect. 
This text attempts to consider the whole process, from strategic rationale to 
implementation. In doing so, the text addresses a combination of strategic, financial 
and implementation issues. The financial issues are addressed by a financial special-
ist and adopt a slightly different format and structure to the rest of the course. 
Candidates may therefore detect structural and content differences between 
Modules 4 (valuation), 5 (merger tactics) and 6 (due diligence) and the other 
modules contained within the text. These differences are intentional, as the financial 
aspects of mergers and acquisitions necessarily take a different viewpoint from the 
strategic and implementation aspects. 
Candidates may detect that the financial modules (Modules 4, 5 and 6) adopt a 
more quantitative approach and make use of a smaller number of more detailed 
end-of-module multi-choice and self-assessment questions. This is because the 
questions used in these modules address a more narrowly focused and defined area 
than the strategic rationale and implementation areas. Strategists and project 
managers (implementers) have to be able to think in terms of a wider range of 
variables and drivers than financial specialists. Modules 1 through 3 and 7 to 10, 
therefore, address a wider range of less detailed end-of-module multi-choice and 
self-assessment questions. 

--- Page 13 ---
 
 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
xiii
Introduction 
As with most EBS advanced integrated texts, Mergers and Acquisitions is split into a 
series of individual modules, structured around five areas whose content and 
delivery sequence are detailed in the following figure. 
 
The five primary sections of the EBS Mergers and Acquisitions course 
Module 1 introduces the primary terms and expressions that are used in the text. 
It goes on to differentiate between mergers and acquisitions and considers the 
Section 1 (Module 1)
Introduction and background
Section 2 (Modules 2 and 3)
Strategic rationale
Section 3 (Modules 4 and 5)
Valuation and due diligence
Section 4 (Modules 6–9)
Implementation
Underlying
strategic rationale
Merger drivers
Strategic focus
Basic introduction to the main
terms used and the underlying
philosophy and rational for
mergers and acquisitions.
The essential strategic
rationale behind mergers
What companies hope
to achieve
The various drivers behind
strategic mergers
Establishing and maintaining
strategic focus
The financial analysis of
potential target companies
Valuation tools and
techniques
Net present value analysis
Potential for growth in
the target
Sections
Basic contents
Valuation
analysis
Growth potential
Due diligence
Pre-
implementation
planning
Project
Management as a
tool for managing
change
Implementation
monitoring and
control
The design and management
of the merger implementation
process
The establishment of a
merger plan
Staffing and resources
Merger implementation teams
Managing the implementation
process
Achieving successful integration
Project management as a tool
for managing change
Section 5
Course summary
Module summary with self-
assessment questions

--- Page 14 ---
Introduction 
xiv 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
underlying rationales and drivers. It also considers the concept of integration as a 
merger goal. 
The text is then divided into three sections that reflect the primary components 
of the course. The three sections are listed below. 
 Strategic rationale 
Modules 2 and 3 are the first of the three main sections of the course. They set 
out the strategic rationale behind mergers, how mergers can disrupt strategic 
focus, and how that focus can be maintained throughout the change process. 
 Valuation, merger strategy and due diligence 
Modules 4 to 6 consider the basic tools and approaches available for valuing a 
potential target company, particularly in relation to its potential for future 
growth. These modules look in detail at the valuation process, the considerations 
inherent in the development of a merger strategy and the process to be adopted 
in conducting a due diligence survey and analysis. 
 Implementation and integration 
Modules 7 to 10 consider the implementation process particularly in the context 
of using project management as a tool for managing change (see the strategic 
focus wheel discussion in the preface). Mergers and acquisitions impose a con-
siderable degree of change on an organisation and it is imperative that properly 
designed procedures and processes are designed and applied. These modules 
consider the processes involved in the preparation of an implementation plan 
and in executing and managing this plan through to completion. 
Philosophy 
This text seeks to establish a process model for mergers and acquisitions. Most 
people know what a model is or at least are familiar with the concept of modelling.  
One definition of a model is: 
  
‘a description, comparison or analogy used to describe that which cannot be 
seen’.  
  
One definition of a process is: 
  
‘a series of actions or operations in order to achieve a defined objective’.  
  
It is therefore reasonable to suggest that a process model of mergers and acquisi-
tions process is a description or analogy of the action and operations involved in 
achieving a mergers and acquisitions system. The idea of a process model is to 
represent the stages and phases involved in a task. A user should be able to look at 
the process model and be able to use it as a kind of map or guide to assist him or 
her in developing the outcome of the model. Process models are useful because they 
are general representations of what has to be done in order to achieve a specified 
outcome. They are usually generic and therefore also relevant in a range of applica-
tions. However, the general nature of the model may restrict the definition and 

--- Page 15 ---
 
Introduction 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
xv
applicability for individual companies and organisations. For specific application, the 
process model has to be tuned with the detailed company data and information 
necessary for an accurate and specific analysis. 
The text is designed so that it develops an understanding of the processes involved 
in mergers and acquisitions. The process model ultimately developed will reflect these 
properties. 

--- Page 16 ---
 
 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
xvi 
List of Abbreviations 
  
ACT 
advance corporation tax 
ACWP 
actual cost of works performed 
AIM 
Alternative Investment Market 
AN 
abnormal return 
AOA 
activity on arc 
AOSC 
administrative operations steering committee 
APV 
adjusted present value 
ARR 
analytical review risk 
BAC 
budget at completion 
BCMT 
business continuity management team 
BCP 
business continuity plan 
BCPMT 
business continuity plan management team 
BCWP 
budgeted cost of works performed 
BCWS 
budgeted cost of works scheduled 
BOE 
barrels of oil equivalent 
BSC 
balanced scorecard 
BV 
book value 
CACS 
cost account code system 
CAPM 
capital asset pricing model 
CAR 
cumulative abnormal return 
CBA 
critical business activity 
CBAM 
critical business activity measure 
CBS 
cost breakdown structure 
CCS 
change control system 
CCS 
constant capital structure 
CDES 
computerised database estimating system 
CEP 
chief executive officer 
CMS 
configuration management system 
CPM 
critical path method 
CR 
control risk 
CSF 
critical success factor 
CV 
cost variance 
DBA 
Doctor of Business Administration 
DCF 
discounted cash flow 
DDR 
due diligence risk 
DIY 
do-it-yourself 

--- Page 17 ---
 
List of Abbreviations 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
xvii
DMS 
draft master schedule 
DR 
detection risk 
DTI 
Department of Trade and Industry 
DVD 
digital versatile disc 
EAC 
estimate at completion 
EAIS 
enterprise application integration system 
EBIT 
earnings before interest and tax paid 
EBITDA 
earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and allowances 
EBS 
Edinburgh Business School 
ECC 
European Competition Commission 
ECTC 
estimated cost to complete 
EPS 
earnings per share 
ESOP 
employee stock ownership plan 
ETTC 
estimated time to completion 
EU 
European Union 
EV 
expected value 
EVA 
earned value analysis 
FARM 
functional area recovery management 
FCF 
free cash flow 
HR 
human resources 
IES 
intelligent electronic systems 
IMS 
information management system 
IR 
inherent risk 
IRG 
implementation review group 
IRR 
internal rate of return 
IT 
information technology 
KEI 
key environmental indicator 
KPI 
key performance indicator 
LPE 
London Petroleum Exchange 
LSE 
London Stock Exchange 
M&A 
mergers and acquisitions 
MACRS 
modified accelerated cost recovery system 
ME 
monetary error 
MIPM 
merger implementation project manager 
MIS 
merger integration survey 
MIT 
merger integration team 
MMC 
Monopolies and Mergers Commission 
MPT 
merger project team 
MTF 
Merger Task Force 
MTT 
merger transition team 

--- Page 18 ---
List of Abbreviations 
xviii 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
NAM 
net advantage of merging 
NCF 
net cash flow 
NOPAT 
net operating profit after tax 
NPV 
net present value 
NWC 
net working capital 
OBS 
organisational breakdown structure 
OCE 
organisational cultural evaluation 
OEM 
original equipment manufacturer 
OER 
organisational effectiveness register 
OFFER 
Office of Electricity Regulation 
OFT 
Office of Fair Trading 
OPEC 
Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries 
PAPRS 
performance assurance plan and review system 
PC 
personal computer 
PCCS 
project cost control system 
PERT 
programme evaluation and review technique 
PLE 
project logic evaluation 
PMS 
project master schedule 
PPB 
party political broadcast 
PPU 
price per unit 
PVAR 
project variance analysis reporting 
R&D 
research and development 
RC 
replacement cost 
REC 
regional electricity company 
ROV 
real option valuation 
SBU 
strategic business unit 
SCC 
strategic change campaign 
SFRT 
specialised functional response team 
SGA 
sales, general and administration 
SIT 
specialist integration team 
SOW 
statement of work 
SPP 
strategic project plan 
SR 
sample risk 
SV 
schedule variance 
SWOT 
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats 
TQM 
total quality management 
TRM 
task responsibility matrix 
VCA 
value created by acquisition 
VO 
variation order 
VOR 
variation order request 

--- Page 19 ---
 
List of Abbreviations 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
xix
WACC 
weighted-average cost of capital 
WAP 
wireless application protocol 
WBS 
work breakdown structure 
  
 

--- Page 20 ---

--- Page 21 ---
 
 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
1/1
Module 1 
 Introduction 
Contents 
1.1 
The Concept of Mergers and Acquisitions ...........................................1/2 
1.2 
Why Companies Merge and Acquire ...................................................1/4 
1.3 
Integration and Conglomeration ..........................................................1/8 
1.4 
The Merger and Acquisition Lifecycle ............................................... 1/10 
1.5 
Measuring the Success of Mergers and Acquisitions ....................... 1/14 
1.6 
A Brief History of Mergers and Acquisitions .................................... 1/17 
Learning Summary ......................................................................................... 1/19 
Review Questions ........................................................................................... 1/24 
 
Learning Objectives 
By the time you have completed this module you should understand: 
 what a merger is and how it differs from an acquisition; 
 some of the reasons why companies merge; 
 the underlying merger rationales; 
 what a merger driver is; 
 what the primary merger drivers are; 
 the difference between horizontal integration, vertical integration and conglom-
eration; 
 the basic merger lifecycle and lifecycle phases; 
 some basic measures of success for mergers; 
 the difference between long-term and short-term measures of success; 
 the basic scenarios for failure; 
 the concept of merger waves and the major waves that have occurred since 1900. 
This module acts as an introduction to the EBS text in Mergers and Acquisitions.  
Note that most of the areas discussed in this module are developed in more detail 
in subsequent modules. This module provides an introduction and overview to 
some of the main issues and considerations relating to mergers and acquisitions.  

--- Page 22 ---
Module 1 / Introduction 
1/2 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
1.1 
The Concept of Mergers and Acquisitions 
1.1.1 
Introduction 
This section introduces the concept of mergers and acquisitions. The section 
assumes no prior knowledge of the subject. 
It should be appreciated at the outset that mergers and acquisitions are affected 
by a number of influences that are very much specific to the individual country 
where they take place. Typical regional factors with a direct impact on mergers and 
acquisitions include: 
 company law; 
 employment law; 
 community law; 
 regulations and regulatory powers; 
 community codes of practice and standards; 
 custom and embedded practices; 
 protectionism. 
For example, in most European countries and the US there are government 
controls on mergers and acquisitions where the combination of two or more 
companies can have an impact on the overall level of competition within a particular 
market. This applies particularly where the merger or acquisition would give the new 
company the ability to alter or fix prices in a particular sector. In the UK the 
Competition Commission considers proposed mergers between large companies in 
the same sector to determine whether there is any possibility of such price control 
being an outcome. Several large proposed mergers have been blocked on these 
grounds in the UK over the past few years. 
Employment law can be a major consideration in some EU countries. There are 
significant differences in the level of employee rights in the various member states. 
Germany, for example, has much more stringent employment law than the UK. A 
UK company wishing to merge with a German company may find itself dealing with 
powerful, legally protected employee ‘commissions’ or representative groups. In 
some cases such groups can influence government bodies and can make the 
difference between the proposed merger being accepted or being blocked.  
In considering mergers and acquisitions it is not possible to allow for the multi-
tude of different restrictions and laws that apply in the numerous different countries 
where such actions take place. This text attempts to develop a generic overview of 
mergers and acquisitions. The main areas and sections covered are intended to 
provide a general overview of what is involved and how the process works. The 
individual regulatory and legal details are generally omitted. 
1.1.2 
Mergers and Acquisitions 
A merger or an acquisition in a company sense can be defined as the combination 
of two or more companies into one new company or corporation. 

--- Page 23 ---
 
Module 1 / Introduction 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
1/3
The main difference between a merger and an acquisition lies in the way in which 
the combination of the two companies is brought about. 
In a merger there is usually a process of negotiation involved between the two 
companies prior to the combination taking place. For example, assume that Com-
panies A and B are existing financial institutions. Company A is a high street bank 
with a large commercial customer base. Company B is a building society or similar 
organisation specialising in providing home loans for the domestic market. Both 
companies may consider that a merger would produce benefits as it would make the 
commercial and domestic customer bases available to the combined company. 
There will obviously be some complications and difficulties involved but there are 
also some obvious potential synergies available. For example, company B might be 
able to use its home loans experience to offer better deals to potential and existing 
mortgage customers of company A. The two companies may decide to initiate 
merger negotiations. If these are favourable, the outcome would be a merger of the 
two companies to form a new larger whole. 
In an acquisition the negotiation process does not necessarily take place. In an 
acquisition company A buys company B. Company B becomes wholly owned by 
company A. Company B might be totally absorbed and cease to exist as a separate 
entity, or company A might retain company B in its pre-acquired form. This limited 
absorption is often practised where it is the intention of company A to sell off 
company B at a profit at some later date. In acquisitions the dominant company is 
usually referred to as the acquirer and the lesser company is known as the ac-
quired. The lesser company is often referred to as the target up to the point where 
it becomes acquired.  
In most cases the acquirer acquires the target by buying its shares. The acquirer 
buys shares from the target’s shareholders up to a point where it becomes the 
owner. Achieving ownership may require purchase of all of the target shares or a 
majority of them. Different countries have different laws and regulations on what 
defines target ownership.  
Acquisitions can be friendly or hostile. In the case of a friendly acquisition the 
target is willing to be acquired. The target may view the acquisition as an opportuni-
ty to develop into new areas and use the resources offered by the acquirer. This 
happens particularly in the case of small successful companies that wish to develop 
and expand but are held back by a lack of capital. The smaller company may actively 
seek out a larger partner willing to provide the necessary investment. In this scenario 
the acquisition is sometimes referred to as a friendly or agreed acquisition. 
Alternatively, the acquisition may be hostile. In this case the target is opposed to 
the acquisition. Hostile acquisitions are sometimes referred to as hostile takeovers.  
One tactic for avoiding a hostile takeover is for the target to seek another com-
pany with which it would rather merge or be acquired by. This third company, if it 
agrees, is sometimes referred to as a white knight, as it ‘comes to the rescue’ of the 
threatened target. 
In hostile takeovers the acquirer may attempt to buy large amounts of the target’s 
shares on the open market. The problem with this action is that the target’s share 
price will tend to increase in value as soon as any large-scale purchases are detected. 

--- Page 24 ---
Module 1 / Introduction 
1/4 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
In order to minimise share price rises, the acquirer may attempt to buy as much 
stock as possible in the shortest possible time, preferably as soon as the markets 
open. This practice is sometimes referred to as a dawn raid, as it attempts to take 
the market (insofar as is possible) ‘by surprise’.  
In both friendly and hostile takeovers the decision on whether or not to sell 
shares in the target lies with the shareholders. If all or a large proportion of target 
shareholders agree to sell their shares, ownership will be transferred to the acquirer. 
Shareholders generally will agree to a merger if they are recommended to do so by 
the board of directors and if they stand to make a profit on the deal. The acquirer 
may offer either cash or its own shares in exchange for target shares. Cash transac-
tions offer shareholders an immediate potential profit, whereas shares offer a 
longer-term investment. Share transactions tend to be more attractive to sharehold-
ers in a buoyant market as the value of the shares is likely to increase more rapidly 
than in a stagnant market. 
1.2 
Why Companies Merge and Acquire 
1.2.1 
Introduction 
There are numerous reasons why one company chooses to merge with or acquire 
another. The literature suggests that the underlying motivation to merge is driven by 
a series of rationales and drivers.  
Rationales consist of the higher-level reasoning that represents decision condi-
tions under which a decision to merge could be made. Drivers are mid-level specific 
(often operational) influences that contribute towards the justification or otherwise 
for a merger. As an example, company A might decide to acquire company B. The 
underlying rationale could be that of strategy implementation. In order to 
achieve one or more strategic objectives it may be necessary for company A to 
acquire company B because, at present, there is over-capacity in the sector in which 
company A and company B operate. This is an example of a strategic rationale. 
The underlying driver for acquiring company B is the desire to control capacity in 
that sector.  
An understanding of the various rationales and drivers behind mergers and ac-
quisitions is very important in developing command of this text.  
1.2.2 
Some Underlying Rationales 
There are several primary rationales that determine the nature of a proposed merger 
or acquisition. These rationales are: 
 Strategic rationale. The strategic rationale makes use of the merger or acquisi-
tion in achieving a set of strategic objectives. As discussed above, a merger to 
secure control of capacity in the chosen sector is an example. Mergers and acqui-
sitions are usually not central in the achievement of strategic objectives, and 
there are usually other alternatives available. For example, company A might 
want to gain a foothold in a lucrative new expanding market but lacks any expe-

--- Page 25 ---
 
Module 1 / Introduction 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
1/5
rience or expertise in the area. One way of overcoming this may be to acquire a 
company that already has a track record of success in the new market. The alter-
native might be to develop a research and development division in the new 
market products in an attempt to catch up and overtake the more established 
players. This alternative choice has obvious cost and time implications. In the 
past it has only really been achieved successfully where the company wishing to 
enter the new market already produces goods or has expertise in a related area. 
As an example, an established producer of electronic goods might elect to divert 
some of its own resources into developing a new related highly promising area 
such as digital telephones. A large scale example is the electronics giant Sony in 
taking the strategic decision to create a research and development facility in elec-
tronics games consoles in order to develop a viable competitive base in this area 
despite there being a relatively small number of very powerful and established 
competitors in the area.  
 The strategic rationale may also be fundamentally defensive. If there are several 
large mergers in a particular sector, a non-merged company may be pressured 
into merging with another non-merged company in order to maintain its com-
petitive position. This strategic scenario tends to happen in sectors dominated by 
relatively large players. In the UK, all of the major high street banks were en-
gaged in merger activity between 1995 and 2002. In the global oil production 
sector, all of the major oil producers were involved in merger activity in the same 
period. In some cases three or more major producers merged into super-
companies. In both industries the merger wave was driven by a need to respond 
to the merger activities of competitors.  
 Speculative rationale. The speculative rationale arises where the acquirer views 
the acquired company as a commodity. The acquired company may be a player 
in a new and developing field. The acquiring company might want to share in the 
potential profitability of this field without committing itself to a major strategic 
realignment. One way to achieve this is to buy established companies, develop 
them, and then sell them for a substantial profit at a later date. This approach is 
clearly high risk, even if the targets are analysed and selected very carefully. A 
major risk, particularly in the case of small and highly specialised targets, is that a 
significant proportion of the highly skilled people who work for the target may 
leave either before, during or immediately after the merger or acquisition. If this 
does happen the actual (rather than apparent) value of the target could diminish 
significantly within a very short time.  
Another form of speculative rationale is where the acquirer purchases an organi-
sation with the intention of splitting the acquired organisation into pieces and 
selling these, or major parts of them, for a price higher than the cost of acquisi-
tion.  
The speculative rationale is also high risk in that it is very vulnerable to changes 
in the environment. Apparently attractive targets, purchased at inflated (premi-
um) cost, may soon diminish significantly in value if market conditions change.  
 Management failure rationale. Mergers or acquisitions can sometimes be 
forced on a company because of management failures. Strategies may be assem-
bled with errors in alignment, or market conditions may change significantly 

--- Page 26 ---
Module 1 / Introduction 
1/6 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
during the implementation timescale. The result may be that the original strategy 
becomes misaligned. It is no longer appropriate in taking the company where it 
wants to go because the company now wants to go somewhere else. Such strat-
egy compromises can arise from a number of sources including changing 
customer demand and the actions of competitors. In such cases, by the time the 
strategy variance has been detected, the company may be so far off the new 
desired strategic track that it is not possible to correct it other than by merging 
with or acquiring another company that will assist in correcting the variance.  
 Financial necessity rationale. Mergers and acquisitions are sometimes required 
for reasons of financial necessity. A company could misalign its strategy and 
suddenly find that it is losing value because shareholders have lost confidence. In 
some cases the only way to address this problem is to merge with a more suc-
cessful company or to acquire smaller more successful companies.  
 Political rationale. The impact of political influences is becoming increasingly 
significant in mergers and acquisitions. In the UK between 1997 and 2002, the 
government instructed the merger of a number of large government departments 
in order to rationalise their operations and reduce operating costs. Government 
policy also encouraged some large public sector organisations to consider and 
execute mergers. These policies resulted in the merger of several large health 
trusts (hospitals financed by central government but under their own manage-
ment control). By 2002 several large universities were also considering merging 
as a result of changes in government funding policy. In Australia, some of the 
‘big four’ banks embarked on an aggressive overseas acquisitions policy because 
legislation in Australia directly prevented them from merging with each other.  
1.2.3 
Merger Drivers 
Some typical merger drivers are considered below. 
 A requirement for specialist skills and/or resources. A company sometimes 
seeks to merge with or acquire another company because the company is keen to 
acquire a specific skill or resource owned by the other company. This type of 
merger or acquisition often occurs where a smaller company has developed high-
value specific skills over a number of years and where it would take an acquiring 
company a long time and a great deal of investment to develop these same skills. 
 National and international stock markets. Variations in share prices can act 
as powerful drivers for mergers and acquisitions. A stock market boom tends to 
make acquisition activity more attractive because it becomes easier to use the 
acquirer’s shares as the basis for the transaction rather than cash. Alternatively a 
falling stock market can lead to potential targets being valued lower, and there-
fore they become more attractive for a cash purchase.  
 Globalisation drivers. Increasing globalisation, facilitated to a considerable 
extent by the growth and development of IT, tends to encourage mergers as the 
geographical separation between individual companies becomes less of an obsta-
cle to organisations working together as single entities, both within the same 
countries and across international boundaries. In the UK several large high street 
banks have been successfully acquired by a major Australian bank.  

--- Page 27 ---
 
Module 1 / Introduction 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
1/7
 National and international consolidation. This type of driver occurs where 
there are compatible companies available for merger or acquisition within the 
same general geographical area(s). 
 Diversification drivers. A company may want to diversify into new areas or 
sectors as a means of balancing the risk profile of its portfolio. Diversification 
was a primary driver of many mergers and acquisitions in the 1960s, 1970s and 
1980s. More recently there has been a discernible move away from diversifica-
tion as a risk-management strategy. Numerous researchers and practitioners have 
argued that diversification and non-related acquisition does not in fact reduce the 
risk profile faced by an organisation. This argument is supported by the assertion 
that the more diversified an organisation is, the less it has developed the specific 
tools and techniques needed to address individual problems relating to any one 
of its range of business activities.  
 Industry and sector pressures. In the 1990s, mergers became very common-
place in some sectors. Large-scale mergers were particularly important in the oil 
exploration and production sector. For example, BP and Amoco merged in 1998 
and Exxon Mobil and Total Petrofina merged in 1999.  
 Capacity reduction. The total production in a given sector may exceed or be 
near to demand so that the value of the product is low. In some cases it may be 
desirable for a company to merge with or acquire a competitor in order to secure 
a greater degree of control over total sector output. If company A acquires com-
pany B, company A has achieved greater control over total sector production 
and also has the opportunity to maintain more of its own production facilities 
and employees within the new company at the expense of company B.  
 Vertical integration. Integration is discussed in Section  1.3. A company may 
attempt to integrate vertically with (for example) a supplier of a key supply in 
order to reduce the risk profile associated with that supplier, and therefore en-
sure continuity of supply.  
 A drive for increased management effectiveness and efficiency. A particular 
company may have a deficit in management expertise in one or more key areas. 
Such areas may be ‘key’ because they are central to a new growth area the com-
pany is seeking to develop, or because they relate to the achievement of new 
strategic objectives that have just been established.  
 A drive to acquire a new market or customer base. A merger or acquisition 
can often provide a fast-track route to new and established markets. If a large 
high street bank merges with another bank, each bank acquires the customer 
base of the other bank. In some cases the acquired customer base may represent 
a market that was previously unavailable For example one bank may have previ-
ously specialised in business customers and the other bank in domestic 
customers. The new arrangement provides a more balanced customer base.  
 A drive to buy into a growth sector or market. Companies sometimes use 
mergers or acquisitions as a way to enter a desirable new market or sector, par-
ticularly if they expect that market or sector to expand in the future.  

--- Page 28 ---
Module 1 / Introduction 
1/8 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
1.3 
Integration and Conglomeration 
1.3.1 
Introduction 
The various merger waves that have taken place since the 1890s (see section 7) have 
generated three basic types of merger. In the literature these are referred to as as 
follows: 
 vertical integration; 
 horizontal integration; 
 conglomeration. 
Vertical integration is characterised by forward or backward integration along the 
supply chain (see Module 3). Horizontal integration is characterised by the practice 
of one company acquiring another company that is active in the same general areas 
or sectors. Conglomeration is characterised by the acquisition of unrelated compa-
nies that continue to produce in unrelated sectors. This section briefly introduces 
these three basic types of merger. 
1.3.2 
Vertical Integration 
Mergers and acquisitions are often used in the pursuit of vertical integration. In its 
simplest form, vertical integration is the process of manufacturers merging with 
suppliers or retailers. Major production companies obtain supplies of goods and raw 
materials from a range of different suppliers. Vertical integration is basically an 
attempt to reduce the risk associated with suppliers. Note that vertical integration can 
run in both directions, as shown in  Figure 1.1.  
 
Figure 1.1 
The concept of vertical integration 
Retail customers
Raw materials
The acquirer
Forward integration
Backward integration

--- Page 29 ---
 
Module 1 / Introduction 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
1/9
Forward integration refers to vertical integration that runs towards the customer 
base, whereas backward integration refers to vertical integration that runs towards 
the supplier base. 
Vertical integration offers a number of obvious advantages. Some of these ad-
vantages are listed below. 
 Combined processes. The production processes of most organisations carry 
fixed price overheads. Typical examples include human resources and IT sup-
port. Where integration allows these overhead functions to become combined, 
there is, theoretically, the prospect of increased support function efficiency. 
 Reduced risk and/or enhanced risk management. Vertical integration allows 
some of the risk associated with suppliers to be removed. Obvious examples are 
sudden supply price increased and late and/or defective deliveries. In many 
ways, the control of supply products and raw materials passes to the acquirer. 
 Configuration management. The concept of configuration management is 
covered in the EBS text Project Management. Configuration management is primar-
ily concerned with the efficient and effective flow of information both within 
and outside an organisation. Information is generally much more easily and ef-
fectively controlled within an organisation and vertical integration, therefore, acts 
to enhance the configuration management system operated by a given organisa-
tion. 
 Quality management. This is an increasingly important consideration for most 
organisations. A fully integrated production system provides the opportunities for 
an enterprise wide quality management system covering everything from raw mate-
rials, through production to sales. As with risk management, quality management is 
more easily executed where supplies, production and sales are contained in-house 
rather than externally.  
 Reduced negotiation. As suppliers are acquired the necessity for complex and 
competitive negotiations decreases. The acquiring company is no longer required 
to negotiate the best deals with suppliers as the suppliers become part of the par-
ent organisation. The obvious downside is that the acquired suppliers may lose 
their competitive edge as they now have a guaranteed market and no longer need 
to compete at the same level.  
 Proprietary and intellectual property protection. This can be an important 
consideration in sectors that are characterised by rapid change and innovation. 
Organisations that operate under these circumstances have to give away a certain 
degree of their organisational knowledge when specifying exactly what they want 
suppliers to produce. In some cases, such specifications can be very revealing, 
and an uncontained supplier could release proprietary and intellectual property 
to a third party.  
 Individualisation. Complete control of suppliers and customers can lead to a 
particular classification of trading known as brand. In order to achieve and main-
tain brand status, organisations have to achieve and maintain a close degree of 
control over all aspects of production and sales so that quality and image can be 
maintained. The evolution of a brand allows organisations to charge a premium 
rate for their products.  

--- Page 30 ---
Module 1 / Introduction 
1/10 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
Vertical integration also implies some disadvantages. By acquiring suppliers the 
acquirer also eliminates the direct competition that existed previously in the supply 
market. This can be addressed to some extent by partial vertical integration, 
where selected key suppliers are integrated while remaining non-key suppliers 
remain outsourced and open to competitive pricing. There are also brand implica-
tions in vertical integration. Some companies have successfully integrated along all 
sections of the production and distribution process. In fast food, for example, a 
company might integrate all outlets and then award outlets operation to selected and 
approved subcontractors through a system of controlled franchises. This practice 
protects the brand from the point of manufacture through distribution and right up 
to the point of sale to the consumer.  
Vertical integration is sometimes extended beyond suppliers to include customers 
as well. Examples of this are particularly pronounced in the interaction between the 
entertainment and fast food industries. It is common practice for manufacturers of 
fast foods and drinks to integrate with outlets such as cinemas and fast food 
restaurants so that only their particular brand of food or drink is offered for sale in 
that outlet. This practice, if successful, more or less guarantees a steady and depend-
able outlet for the food or drink product concerned. 
1.3.3 
Horizontal Integration 
Mergers and acquisitions can also be used in order to achieve horizontal integration. 
Horizontal integration occurs where two companies engaged in essentially the same 
product or service merge to improve their combined value. As discussed above, 
horizontal integration has been widespread in the global oil production sector over 
the past few years. Another example is where automobile distribution companies 
buy other companies with distribution franchises for ranges of vehicles from other 
manufacturers.  
1.3.4 
Conglomeration  
Conglomeration mergers occur where the merging companies continue to operate in 
different sectors and industries. Conglomeration can be a useful approach in 
spreading business risk across a range of different areas. As conglomerates grow and 
expand, however, they run the risk of becoming unfocused as their senior manage-
ment team may be unfamiliar with the new products, services and markets that are 
introduced as unrelated companies are acquired. In effect, the risks increase rather 
than decrease.  
1.4 
The Merger and Acquisition Lifecycle 
1.4.1 
Introduction 
Most mergers and acquisitions progress through a clearly identifiable lifecycle. In 
this context, the word ‘lifecycle’ is taken to refer to the changes that take place during the 
life of an entity. In this context the word ‘entity’ means something that exists in its own 

--- Page 31 ---
 
Module 1 / Introduction 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
1/11
right, and has its own existence. A merger can be regarded as consisting of two or more 
entities progressing through a series of identifiable changes or lifecycle points until 
the merger is complete. More correctly, most mergers and acquisitions do not have 
a clearly defined completion point. Most organisations, however, do establish a 
point at which the merger or acquisition is regarded as being complete. After this 
point the process usually receives no separate resources or funding. Any longer-term 
costs are simply absorbed into the overall operational expenses of the organisation.  
This section considers a simplified view of the lifecycle phases of a typical mer-
ger. The lifecycle phases involved in the implementation process are considered in 
more detail in Modules 7–10. 
1.4.2 
Typical Lifecycle Phases 
A typical set of merger lifecycle phases is shown in  Figure 1.2. 
 
Figure 1.2 
The merger lifecycle (simplified) 
Most mergers commence with an inception phase. In this phase the senior man-
agers of an organisation initiate the process. Inception is usually followed by a 
feasibility stage where the underlying financial and logistic areas are considered. The 
merger may be initiated to improve financial performance or for numerous other 
Inception
Feasibility Pre-merger
negotiations
Contract
formulation
The deal
Implementation
Commissioning
Post-
implementation
feedback and
review
Underlying
rationale
Strategic planners
Merger consultants
The implementation team
Lifecycle phases
Resources
Responsibilities
Pre-merger planning and development
Pre-merger implementation planning
Post-merger implementation planning
Post-merger implementation
Commitment to proceed

--- Page 32 ---
Module 1 / Introduction 
1/12 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
reasons (see Section  1.2.3). Most feasibility phases include a detailed analysis of the 
financial characteristics of the proposed merger together with considerations of 
likely timescales, synergy generation and other variables. 
At some point during, or on completion of, the feasibility phase a firm commit-
ment is made to proceed. At this point the organisation commits itself to the merger 
and allocates funding and resources as necessary. 
The pre-merger negotiation phase usually starts right after the commitment to 
proceed. In this phase the senior managers of the two organisations enter into 
negotiations in order to reach agreement on the structure and format of the new 
combined organisation. The negotiation phase often involves external professional 
consultants such as specialist contract lawyers. In many cases (especially in the US) 
specialist merger project management consultants are used as negotiation drivers 
and facilitators. 
Once the negotiations are complete, the deal itself takes the form of a detailed 
merger contract. The contract sets out the rights and obligations of each party 
(organisation) under the terms of the deal. Merger contracts can be extremely 
complex and are usually developed and finalised by specialist external consultants 
working with in-house specialists.  
The implementation process starts as soon as the contract is in place. Implemen-
tation includes the mechanics of actually making the merger happen. In the UK, 
implementation is often carried out by in-house project teams, whereas in the US 
there are growing numbers of external project management implementation 
consultants who offer integrated services that take implementation through from 
inception to completion. There is usually some point at which implementation is 
designated as being complete, at least from an independent project point of view. 
This point is usually followed by a longer-term phase in which the new organisation 
acclimatises to the new organisational structure. This phase is usually referred to as 
commissioning. In some cases the commissioning phase can continue for several 
years. 
In reality, merger lifecycles can be considered in much more complex terms. In 
practice, in order to have sufficient control and response it is usually necessary to 
subdivide each lifecycle phase into relatively small components. For example, pre-
merger negotiations might be considered in terms of several different sub-phases, 
each of which may be separated by control gateways. Each phase of negotiation may 
have to be concluded and agreed before the negotiation process can move through 
that gateway and on to the next phase. It is common practice to establish precise 
performance achievements before each gateway can be passed. It is also common 
for merger implementation managers (see Module 9 and Module 10) to establish 
detailed reviews and associated reporting procedures for each phase. These proce-
dures can be very useful in ensuring that the entire merger remains focused and on 
track.  
 Figure 1.2 shows the various specialists that are involved in each stage of the 
lifecycle. The early stages tend to be dominated by the strategic planners (or 
equivalent), who are responsible for initiating the merger and for making a strategic 
evaluation of the decision. Once the decision to merge is made and the commitment 

--- Page 33 ---
 
Module 1 / Introduction 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
1/13
to proceed is given, the involvement of the strategic planners diminishes, to be 
replaced by an increased input from the implementation team and the various 
specialist consultants who may be involved. The external consultants are usually 
primarily involved in setting up the contracts and the remaining aspects of the deal. 
Their involvement diminishes when the deal is signed although they often have a 
long-term lesser involvement. The post-deal work is largely dominated by the 
integration team. These variations in responsibility involvement are summarised in 
 Figure 1.3.  
 
Figure 1.3 
Typical people involvement before and after the deal 
Where possible the integration team should be involved at the earliest possible 
time. In general terms, the greater the involvement the implementation people have 
in planning the merger, the greater the impact they can have on the development of 
the plans and the more easily they can actually implement the plans after the deal is 
signed.  
The integration team consists largely of operational people. Their early involve-
ment is likely to provide a clearer view of the work required to implement the 
merger. This clarity contributes significantly to understanding the timescales and 
magnitude of cost involved, and will in turn lead to more accurate estimates of the 
true value of the net benefits to be derived. It also militates against over-optimism 
on the part of the strategic planners and financial advisors.  
There is a risk involved in this approach in that there is always a possibility that 
the early negotiations may be unsuccessful and the deal could fall through. If this 
does happen, the work that the implementation team have put into the early merger 
planning may be abortive. There is generally a balance or trade-off between reducing 
Strategic
planners
Merger consultants
Implementation team
Decision to merge
Signing
the deal
Input
demand
Time
Pre-merger
evaluation and
negotiation
Post-merger
implementation
Overall implementation

--- Page 34 ---
Module 1 / Introduction 
1/14 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
merger risks and unknowns by involving the integration team early and accepting 
the risk of potentially high, abortive implementation planning costs.  
1.5 
Measuring the Success of Mergers and Acquisitions 
1.5.1 
Introduction 
There are numerous ways in which the relative success or failure of a merger can be 
defined. Success may be defined in terms of short-term measures of performance, 
such as an improvement in turnover during the year immediately after the merger. 
Alternatively, success can be considered in terms of long-term measures of perfor-
mance such as a sustained increase in average share value during the 10 years after 
the merger. In many cases success is measured in terms of a combination of short- 
and long-term performance.  
1.5.2 
Short-term Measures of Success 
There are several well-documented short-term effects of a merger announcement. 
In most cases, when the announcement is made the value of the target company 
shares will increase while the value of the acquiring company shares will remain 
static or fall. In many cases the prices of the target company shares will increase 
prior to the announcement because of pre-announcement rumours. The tendency 
for the target share price to rise has important implications for the short-term 
financial success of the acquisition. In many cases the typical share price behaviour 
discussed can result in the acquirer paying an inflated price for the target. The 
difference between the pre-rumour value and the merger bid value represents the 
inflationary premium. As a result, acquired companies are often overvalued at the 
time of acquisition, particularly where more than one bidder exists.  
Shareholders may therefore have two different views of success in the context of 
an acquisition. Target shareholders who sell shares to the acquirer at the premium 
rate make more money than they otherwise would have done in selling the shares. 
For target shareholders who sell, the short-term view of the acquisition may be one 
of success. Shareholders who remain with the target and continue to hold shares of 
the merged company may have a different long-term view.  
1.5.3 
Long-term Measures of Success 
The longer-term view tends to be more complex and less clearly defined. The 
literature suggests that long-term performance can depend on a wide range of 
variables. In straightforward financial terms the long-term success of the merger 
appears to depend on two main areas: 
 payment method; 
 implementation. 
The merger deal itself is generally financed either by a cash deal, or by a share 
deal, or by a combination of the two. In a cash deal, existing shareholders sell their 
shares for a cash sum. In a share deal, existing shareholders receive new shares for 

--- Page 35 ---
 
Module 1 / Introduction 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
1/15
their existing ones. In some cases the deal may use a combination of both in what is 
sometimes referred to as a combined deal. Generally, in a buoyant economy more 
deals will be done through shares as the value of these shares is likely to increase 
over time. However, companies paying in shares are more likely to have overvalued 
shares, particularly in the period immediately before the deal. After the deal, the true 
value of the stock becomes apparent and the value generally falls. As an alternative, 
companies paying in cash tend to have higher debt levels and undervalued stock. 
There is evidence to suggest that, in the long term, mergers paid for in shares will 
perform less well from a shareholder’s point of view than those paid for in cash so 
long as the economy remains depressed. In a buoyant economy better long-term 
performance can be expected from companies that have paid for the deal in shares. 
The other major long-term problem indicated by the literature is ineffective im-
plementation. Numerous mergers continue the implementation process for much 
longer than was originally intended. In addition it is common to find that the 
original implementation plans are changed during the integration process as it 
becomes apparent that the implementation plans were not sufficiently well thought 
through, or that the problems associated with full integration were not fully appreci-
ated during the planning stages. 
Merger implementation and integration are considered in more detail in the final 
four modules of this course.  
1.5.4 
Some Scenarios for Failure 
It should be clear that it can be very difficult to say clearly whether a merger or 
acquisition has been successful, either in the short term or in the long term. The 
degree of success involved depends on the point of view of the observer, the 
timescale being considered and determinants of success being used for evaluation. 
The literature contains many examples of studies carried out on merger success 
and failure. Some of the literature is contradictory, while other areas of the literature 
lack clear outcomes and conclusions. There are, however, key issues frequently 
quoted in the literature upon which there is more or less common agreement. The 
primary reasons for a relatively unsuccessful outcome appear to be those listed 
below. 
 An inability to agree terms. In same cases the proposed merger may never 
even be implemented because the senior managers in the two companies are 
unable to agree terms for the merger. In such cases the merger has to be classi-
fied as a failure because of the cost involved and time wasted. There have been 
several examples in the UK between 1995 and 2002 of potentially very large 
mergers that failed to materialise because the senior managers could not agree on 
the management and organisational structures of the proposed new organisation. 
An example of such a failure was the proposed UK merger between Abbey Na-
tional and Bank of Scotland.  
 Overestimation of the true value of the target. Acquirers often pay more for 
the target than it is actually worth. In the short term this could result from pre-
merger target share price rises as discussed earlier. In the longer term the prob-

--- Page 36 ---
Module 1 / Introduction 
1/16 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
lem could result from an inaccurate assessment of the value of the target, either 
through poor valuation and due diligence or because the sector within which the 
company operates is subject to potential large-scale changes. Over-optimistic 
assessments, particularly where there is more than one bidder, are also common. 
 The target being too large relative to the acquirer. The literature suggests 
that the difficulties associated with a merger or acquisition increase as a function 
of the relative size of the target. This tends to happen because the target be-
comes more and more difficult to absorb as it becomes relatively larger. A target 
equal in size to the acquirer can only be effectively absorbed in a merger of 
equals.  
 A failure to realise all identified potential synergies. The underlying rationale 
behind mergers and acquisitions is often influenced by the potential to generate 
and exploit synergies. These potential synergies may seem achievable during the 
planning stage, but actually realising and exploiting them can be significantly 
more difficult than anticipated.  
 External change. Mergers and acquisition logic is sometimes superseded by 
events. Even the best strategic planners can occasionally fail to see sudden and 
large scale changes in the external market. Where such changes do occur, the 
whole rationale behind the merger or acquisition can quickly dissipate, some-
times with disastrous results. Examples include companies that acquired dot.com 
targets just before the relative global collapse in this sector in the late 1990s. 
 An inability to implement change. A large-scale merger or acquisition 
generates a considerable amount of change. In a merger of equals all sections of 
each organisation may be subjected to change of varying degrees. Some compa-
nies are better than others at designing and implementing change. In some cases 
there may be a basic inability to plan and manage change effectively. In other 
cases there may be a deep-rooted cultural opposition to change.  
 Shortcomings in the implementation and integration processes. Poor 
implementation frequently shows up in the literature as a primary scenario for 
failure. The most common reason for poor implementation is inadequate plan-
ning and control. In mergers and acquisitions generally, the most common 
specific cause of poor implementation is the lack of an implementation driver. 
Most implementation processes appear to be carried out without an overriding 
driving force behind them. The result is that they take longer than originally 
expected, and the opportunity for generating and exploiting synergies may be 
lost as a result.  
 A failure to achieve technological fit. Technological fit and the failure to 
achieve it are very common problem areas in mergers and acquisitions. Compa-
nies tend to develop their own technologies and technological approaches to 
production over a number of years, and each system tends to be highly individu-
alistic. It can be extremely difficult to merge two entirely different technological 
systems. In some cases the costs of doing so fully would be prohibitively expen-
sive.  
 Conflicting cultures. The incompatibility of corporate cultures is another 
classical scenario for failure. Cultures, like technologies, tend to evolve over a 

--- Page 37 ---
 
Module 1 / Introduction 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
1/17
long period of time and are highly individualistic. It is very common to observe 
the formation of conflict when two corporate cultures are thrown together with 
inadequate preparation.  
 A weak central core in the target. Targets may be unfocused or there may be 
problems with the central or core elements in the company. In such cases the 
acquisition may turn out to be less valuable than was originally thought. Typical 
examples were the acquisitions of the apparent high-growth dot.com companies 
of the late 1990s. 
1.6 
A Brief History of Mergers and Acquisitions 
1.6.1 
Introduction 
Mergers occur in waves. There have been five clear waves since the end of the 
nineteenth century. Each wave had different characteristics and was generated by 
different combinations of events. However, there are remarkable similarities 
between the first wave and the current fifth wave. It is important to be able to 
understand merger wave patterns because they provide a valuable insight into how 
the current fifth wave may evolve.  
1.6.2 
Merger Waves 
It is important to understand that mergers and acquisitions are very much driven by 
external forces. In addition, a cursory examination of the history of mergers and 
acquisitions reveals that they tend to occur in waves. There appears to be a direct 
relationship between merger activity and external economic forces such as national 
events of major significance and variations in the global economy. 
 The railroad wave (approximately 1895–1905). In the United States there was 
a first major wave of mergers between 1890 and 1910. This wave was fuelled by 
the completion of the transcontinental railway system that linked cities across the 
entire US for the first time. This continental transport system created an inte-
grated national market in the US. Rail links provided the opportunity for local or 
regional companies to evolve into fully national companies. This wave is some-
times referred to as the railroad wave. It was characterised by both vertical and 
horizontal integration mergers. Some global brand names were established 
through the horizontal integration of leading producers during this wave. Exam-
ples include Coca-Cola and General Electric.  
 The automobile wave (approximately 1918–1930). The next major merger 
wave in the US was generated by the expansion in the general availability of au-
tomobiles in the 1920s and early 1930s. Whereas the railway system had linked 
cities together across the continent, the widespread availability and affordability 
of automobiles allowed local customers to gain access to a larger number of local 
and regional outlets. Automobiles also enabled companies to make much more 
use of professional sales teams. The widespread use of trucks and delivery vans 
stimulated companies based particularly in food and food processing. This wave 
is sometimes referred to as the automobile wave. It was again characterised by 

--- Page 38 ---
Module 1 / Introduction 
1/18 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
a high level of vertical and horizontal integration. The most prominent feature 
was perhaps the level of horizontal integration among secondary (as opposed to 
primary) producers in heavy industry and the financial sectors.  
 The conglomerate wave (approximately 1955–1970). The 1920s wave was 
followed by the 1960s wave. This wave is sometimes referred to as the con-
glomerate wave. Legislation in the US at that time made it difficult for 
companies to integrate horizontally or vertically. At the same time the dynamic 
US economy provided the incentive for rapid growth. This induced companies 
to form mergers and acquisitions with other companies operating outside the 
acquirer’s normal sphere of operations. This wave was characterised by a large 
number of management problems as acquirers experienced difficulty in manag-
ing their newly acquired assets, and there were numerous problems and failures. 
 The mega-merger wave (approximately 1980–1990). The 1980s was a decade 
of rising share prices and a very buoyant economy. Relatively low interest rates 
made acquisition finance readily available. This fuelled a considerable number of 
cash-financed acquisitions of firms that were relatively low performers. There 
were examples of so called mega-mergers, which were indeed carried out on a 
very large scale by the standards of that time. The wave itself is sometimes re-
ferred to as the mega-mergers wave. Successive US and UK governments 
deregulated numerous sectors and relaxed anti-merger and merger-control legis-
lation. These actions actively encouraged large-scale horizontal mergers. In the 
US competition was significantly reduced in a number of industries, including oil 
production and chemicals.  
 The globalisation wave (approximately 1994 to the present). The current 
globalisation wave started in the mid 1990s and expanded rapidly though the last 
few years of the twentieth century and into the early years of the twenty-first 
century. These relatively few but extremely important years were characterised by 
a number of very significant facts.  
 Market growth was slow. Mergers and acquisitions allowed companies to 
grow in otherwise slow markets. 
 Interest rates were very low. Companies were able to take out relatively large 
loans at much lower interest rates than would have been possible just a few 
years previously. The relatively low cost of finance made mergers and acquisi-
tions more of an economic reality for a wider number of companies.  
 Supply exceeded demand in most industries, putting pressure on prices and 
generating a necessity to reduce costs. One way of achieving this was through 
the scale economies that could be generated by successful mergers and acqui-
sitions. 
 By the late 1990s many industries were mature or close to being mature; they 
realised that scale economies through mergers and acquisitions provided a vi-
able way of reducing costs and increasing competitiveness.  
 The growth of computers and IT made an increasing impact on company 
operations. Geographical separation and international frontiers became less 
important as the Internet expanded and crossed traditional trade borders. 

--- Page 39 ---
 
Module 1 / Introduction 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
1/19
 Companies began to realise that the global marketplace opens up access to 
both buyers and sellers of products and services. The increase on the supply 
side places a downward pressure on prices and therefore on costs.  
The current wave is sometimes referred to as the globalisation wave. It is char-
acterised by very high growth in new technologies and new communication 
media including the Internet. In generating the fifth merger wave it can generally 
be said that companies were exposed to global competition; many of the old 
trade barriers weakened or disappeared all together. In many countries public 
utilities were privatised, and global competition generated pressures for deregula-
tion in many areas. The net result was a blurring of traditional trade boundaries 
and sectors. The result was an increasing pressure on companies to change. 
Companies generally had to reduce costs and produce higher-quality, more cus-
tomer-oriented products. These factors combined to produce a generally 
favourable environment for mergers and acquisitions.  
The fifth wave is ongoing and is remarkably similar in many ways to the first 
wave. It will be recalled that the first wave was propagated by the completion of the 
railroad network. This was effectively the result of new technology opening up a 
nationwide market for goods. In the globalisation wave, new technology in the form 
of computers, IT and the Internet is opening up global markets. The globalisation 
imperative is assisted by a number of associated initiatives, such as: 
 the increasingly global view taken by companies; 
 the expansion of the Internet and electronic communications; 
 the privatisation of previously state-owned bodies; 
 the development of common currencies such as the euro; 
 the deregulation of financial institutions; 
 the relaxation of regulations relating to mergers and acquisitions; 
 the increasing liberalisation of world trade and investment; 
 the formation of trading blocs such as the EU. 
International mergers create companies with an international scale and effectively 
link the world capitalist system more firmly together.  
Learning Summary 
The text has considered the following areas that candidates should now be familiar 
with 
 what a merger is and how it differs from an acquisition; 
 some of the reasons why companies merge; 
 the underlying merger rationales; 
 what a merger driver is; 
 what the primary merger drivers are; 
 the difference between horizontal integration, vertical integration and conglom-
eration; 
 the basic merger lifecycle and lifecycle phases; 

--- Page 40 ---
Module 1 / Introduction 
1/20 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
 some basic measures of success for mergers; 
 the difference between long-term and short-term measures of success; 
 the basic scenarios for failure; 
 the concept of merger waves and the major waves that have occurred since 1900. 
It should be appreciated that mergers and acquisitions are complex high-risk 
operations. Even very large companies with previous experience of mergers and 
acquisitions face dangers during the merger/acquisition process, with the probability 
that the eventual outcome cannot be classified as entirely successful.  
In the preceding sections, the text has sought to provide an overview of the key 
influences. As in most areas of management, there will be exceptions to the general 
‘rules‘. However, these tend to be small in numbers. 
The Concept of Mergers and Acquisitions 
 Mergers and acquisitions vary widely between countries.  
 In most European countries and the US there are government controls on 
mergers and acquisitions where the combination of two or more companies 
can have an impact on the overall level of competition within a particular 
market. This applies especially where the merger or acquisition would give 
the new company the ability to alter or fix the price in a particular sector.  
 Employment law can be a major consideration in some EU countries. There 
are significant differences in the level of employee rights that are recognised 
between the various member states.  
 For some reason, mergers and acquisitions appear to be mainly an Anglo-
Saxon phenomenon. They are far more frequent in Anglo-Saxon countries 
than they are in non Anglo-Saxon countries.  
 A merger or an acquisition in a company sense can be defined as the 
combination of two or more companies into one new company or corpora-
tion. 
 The main difference between a merger and an acquisition lies in the way in 
which the combination of the two companies is brought about. 
 In a merger there is usually a process of negotiation involved between the 
two companies prior to the combination taking place.  
 In an acquisition, the negotiation process does not necessarily take place.  
 In most cases the acquirer acquires the target by buying its shares. The 
acquirer buys shares from the target’s shareholders up to a point where it 
becomes the owner. Achieving ownership may require purchase of all of the 
target shares or a majority of them. Different countries have different laws 
and regulations on what defines target ownership.  
 Acquisitions can be friendly or hostile. In the case of a friendly acquisition 
the target is willing to be acquired. The target may view the acquisition as an 
opportunity to develop into new areas and use the resources offered by the 
acquirer.  
 In the case of a hostile acquisition, the target is opposed to the acquisition. 
Hostile acquisitions are sometimes referred to as hostile takeovers.  

--- Page 41 ---
 
Module 1 / Introduction 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
1/21
 In hostile takeovers the acquirer may attempt to buy large amounts of the 
target’s shares on the open market. The problem with this action is that 
target share prices will tend to increase in value as soon as any large-scale 
purchases are detected.  
 In both friendly and hostile takeovers the decision on whether or not to sell 
target shares lies with the shareholders. If all or a large proportion of target 
shareholders agree to sell, ownership will be transferred to the acquirer.  
Why Companies Merge and Acquire 
 Companies sometimes merge or acquire in order to try and improve long-
term competitive advantage in support of strategic goals.  
 The strategic rationale makes use of the merger or acquisition in achieving a 
set of strategic objectives.  
 The strategic rationale may also be fundamentally defensive. If there are 
several large mergers in a particular sector, a non-merged company may be 
pressured into merging with another non-merged company in order to main-
tain its competitive position.  
 The speculative rationale arises where the acquirer views the acquired 
company as a commodity.  
 Another form of speculative rationale is where the acquirer purchases an 
organisation with the intention of splitting the acquired organisation into 
pieces and selling these, or major parts of them, for a price that is higher 
than the cost of acquisition.  
 Mergers or acquisitions can sometimes be forced on a company because of 
management failures. Strategies may be assembled with errors in alignment, 
or market conditions may change significantly during the implementation 
timescale. The result may be that the original strategy becomes misaligned. It 
is no longer appropriate in taking the company where it wants to go because 
the company now wants to go somewhere else. 
 Such strategy compromises can arise from a number of sources, including 
changing customer demand and the actions of competitors. In such cases, by 
the time the strategy variance has been detected the company may be so 
far off the new desired strategic track that it is not possible to correct it 
other than by merging with or acquiring another company that will assist in 
correcting the variance.  
 Mergers and acquisitions are sometimes required for reasons of financial 
necessity. A company could misalign its strategy and suddenly find that it is 
losing value because shareholders have lost confidence. In some cases the 
only way to address this problem is to merge with a more successful compa-
ny or to acquire smaller more successful companies.  
 Government and other public sector bodies may sometimes be instructed to 
merge as part of long-term government initiatives.  
 Merger drivers are underlying events or characteristics that act to drive 
companies towards mergers or acquisitions. Typical examples include: 

--- Page 42 ---
Module 1 / Introduction 
1/22 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
 a requirement for a specific skill or resource;  
 the stock market;  
 globalisation;  
 geographical consolidation;  
 diversification;  
 sector pressures;  
 capacity reduction;  
 vertical integration;  
 increased management efficiency;  
 a desire to acquire a new market or customer base; 
 the need to buy into a growth sector or market.  
Integration and Conglomeration 
 The various merger waves that have taken place since the 1890s have 
generated three basic types of merger. In the literature these are referred to 
as: 
 vertical integration; 
 horizontal integration; 
 conglomeration. 
 Vertical integration is characterised by forward or backward integration 
along the supply chain.  
 Horizontal integration is characterised by the practice of one company 
acquiring another company that is active in the same general areas or sec-
tors.  
 Conglomeration is characterised by the acquisition of unrelated companies 
that continue to produce in unrelated sectors. This section briefly introduces 
these three basic types of merger. 
 Vertical integration offers a number of obvious advantages. Some of these 
advantages are: 
 combined processes; 
 reduced risk; 
 reduced negotiation and shopping around; 
 proprietary knowledge protection. 
The Merger and Acquisition Lifecycle 
 Most mergers and acquisitions progress through a clearly identifiable lifecy-
cle. In this context, the word ‘lifecycle’ is taken to refer to the changes that 
take place during the life of an entity.  
 Most mergers commence with an inception phase. In this phase the senior 
managers of an organisation initiate the process.  
 Inception is usually followed by a feasibility stage, where the underlying 
financial and logistic considerations are considered. 

--- Page 43 ---
 
Module 1 / Introduction 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
1/23
 At some point during or on completion of the feasibility phase a firm 
commitment is made to proceed. At this point the organisation commits 
itself to the merger and allocates funding and resources as necessary. 
 The pre-merger negotiation phase usually starts right after the commitment 
to proceed. In this phase the senior managers of the two organisations enter 
into negotiations in order to reach agreement on the structure and format 
of the new combined organisation.  
 Once the negotiations are complete the deal itself takes the form of a 
detailed merger contract. The contract sets out the rights and obligations of 
each party (organisation) under the terms of the deal.  
 The implementation process starts as soon as the contract is in place. 
Implementation includes the mechanics of actually making the merger hap-
pen.  
Measuring the Success of Mergers and Acquisitions 
 A significant proportion of mergers appear to fail in terms of short-term 
financial value creation. 
 There is some evidence to suggest that merger success or failure should be 
measured in longer-term variables. 
 Many mergers appear to fail because of poor implementation. 
 Typical reasons for merger failure include: 
 an inability to agree terms;  
 overestimation of the true value of the target;  
 the target being too large relative to the acquirer;  
 a failure to realise all identified potential synergies;  
 an inability to implement change;  
 shortcomings in the implementation and integration processes;  
 a failure to achieve technological fit;  
 conflicting cultures;  
 a weak central core in the target.  
A Brief History of Mergers and Acquisitions 
 Mergers occur in waves. There have been five clear waves since the end of 
the nineteenth century.  
 Each wave had different characteristics and was generated by different 
combinations of events. 
 The first wave was the railroad wave. It was driven by the development of 
the transcontinental railway line network in the US between 1985 and 1905. 
 The second wave was the automobile wave. This wave was driven by the 
widespread availability and use of automobiles between 1918 and 1930. 
 The third wave was the conglomeration wave. This was driven by a combina-
tion of legislation and the dynamic US economy. 

--- Page 44 ---
Module 1 / Introduction 
1/24 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
 The fourth wave was the mega-merger wave. This wave reached its peak in 
the late 1980s. It was largely driven by the maturity of a number of large 
industries coupled with over-capacity and a need to reduce costs. 
 The current wave is the globalisation wave and is driven largely by IT. 
Review Questions 
These questions are designed to allow you to evaluate your general understanding of
the subject areas quickly. You should attempt these questions as quickly as possible. You
should be able to answer the majority of them correctly if you have developed a
reasonable knowledge of the subject areas.  
True/False Questions 
The Concept of Mergers and Acquisitions 
1.1 
This text is primarily concerned with mergers and acquisitions from a strategic point of 
view. T or F? 
1.2 
The underlying rationale behind mergers and acquisitions is often affected by the actions 
of regulators. T or F? 
1.3 
Employment law can critically affect mergers in some countries. T or F? 
1.4 
The main difference between a merger and an acquisition lies in the way in which the 
combination of the two companies is brought about. T or F? 
1.5 
In an acquisition there is usually a process of negotiation involved between the two 
companies prior to the combination taking place. T or F? 
1.6 
Mergers are usually hostile. T or F? 
1.7 
Most acquisitions are financed using cash. T or F? 
1.8 
Acquisitions can generally be classified as friendly or hostile. T or F? 
Why Companies Merge and Acquire 
1.9 
The strategic rationale is only one of a series of alternative rationales. T or F? 
1.10 The strategic rationale is always less risky than the speculative rationale. T or F? 
1.11 Merger drivers are characteristics or events that drive companies towards mergers or 
acquisitions. T or F? 

--- Page 45 ---
 
Module 1 / Introduction 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
1/25
1.12 The stock market could be an example of a merger driver. T or F? 
Integration and Conglomeration 
1.13 Vertical integration is characterised by forward or backward integration along the supply 
chain.  
T or F? 
1.14 Horizontal integration is characterised by the practice of one company acquiring 
another company that is active in the same general areas or sectors. T or F? 
1.15 Conglomeration is characterised by the acquisition of unrelated companies that 
continue to produce in unrelated sectors. T or F? 
1.16 In its simplest form, vertical integration is the process of manufacturers merging with 
suppliers or retailers. T or F? 
1.17 Vertical integration can be both forward and backward. T or F? 
The Merger and Acquisition Lifecycle 
1.18 Most mergers and acquisitions can be considered as projects with identifiable lifecycle 
stages.  
T or F? 
1.19 The commitment to proceed usually comes right after the pre-merger negotiations.  
T or F? 
1.20 The implementation team should not be involved in the planning process until the latest 
possible time. T or F? 
Measuring the Success of Mergers and Acquisitions 
1.21 There is no single method for evaluating the success or otherwise of a merger or 
acquisition.  
T or F? 
1.22 In purely financial terms most mergers are a success, at least in the short term. T or F? 
1.23 Mergers never fail because of an inability to agree terms. T or F? 
1.24 The actual value of targets is often overestimated, resulting in the payment of an 
inflationary premium. T or F? 

--- Page 46 ---
Module 1 / Introduction 
1/26 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
A Brief History of Mergers and Acquisitions 
1.25 Mergers appear to happen in waves. T or F? 
1.26 The first wave was the automobile wave. T or F? 
1.27 The current (globalisation) wave is the fourth wave. T or F? 
1.28 One driver of the current (globalisation) wave was the growth and spread of IT. T or F? 
Multiple-Choice Questions 
The Concept of Mergers and Acquisitions 
1.29 In most EU countries there are: 
A.  no controls on mergers and acquisitions.
 
B.  some controls on mergers and acquisitions.
 
C.  general rules subject to individual application consideration.
 
D.  precise and clearly defined rules on mergers and acquisitions.
 
1.30 The degree of board–board negotiation in a hostile acquisition is generally: 
I. less than in a friendly acquisition. 
II. largely non-existent. 
III. extensive and varied. 
IV. about the same as in a merger of equals. 
Which of the above is/are true? 
A.  I only.
 
B.  I and II.
 
C.  I, II and III.
 
D.  III and IV.
 
1.31 In many cases, as soon as a major acquisition is announced the target’s share prices: 
A.  double or treble in value. 
 
B.  increase significantly.
 
C.  remain static.
 
D.  decrease.
 

--- Page 47 ---
 
Module 1 / Introduction 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
1/27
1.32 Hostile takeovers can be funded by: 
I. cash only. 
II. shares only. 
III. cash and shares.  
IV. other incentives. 
Which of the above is/are true? 
A.
I only.
 
B.
I and II. 
 
C. I, II and IV. 
 
D. I, II, III and IV.
 
Why Companies Merge and Acquire 
1.33 Companies often merge or acquire on the basis of an underlying 
I. strategic rationale. 
II. speculative rationale. 
III. management failure rationale. 
IV. financial necessity rationale. 
Which of the above is/are true? 
A.
I only.
 
B.
I and II. 
 
C. I, II and IV. 
 
D. I, II, III and IV.
 
1.34 Mergers and acquisitions conducted under the strategic rationale are usually carried out 
with the objective of: 
I. adding long-term competitive advantage. 
II. increasing the value of the target with the intention of future resale. 
III. responding to the demands of immediate financial shortcomings. 
IV. complying with regulator requirements. 
Which of the above is/are true? 
A.
I only.
 
B.
I and II. 
 
C. I, III and IV. 
 
D. I, II, III and IV.
 
1.35 The following are examples of strategic merger drivers: 
I. enhanced vertical integration. 
II. acquisition of a new customer base.  
III. increased management efficiency. 
IV. increased short-term resale profit. 
Which of the above is/are true? 
A.
I only.
 
B.
I and II. 
 
C. I, II and III. 
 
D. I, II, III and IV.
 

--- Page 48 ---
Module 1 / Introduction 
1/28 
Edinburgh Business School   Mergers and Acquisitions
Integration and Conglomeration 
1.36 Vertical integration offers advantages based on: 
I. combined processes. 
II. configuration management. 
III. quality management. 
IV. scale economies.  
Which of the above is/are true? 
A.  I only.
 
B.  I and II.
 
C.  I, II and III.
 
D.  I, II, III and IV.
 
1.37 Generally conglomeration is now: 
A.  becoming increasingly popular.
 
B.  becoming marginally more popular.
 
C.  becoming less poplar.
 
D.  more or less as popular as it always has been.
 
1.38 One of the man reasons for de-conglomerisation is to 
A.  reduce business risk.
 
B.  increase business risk at a premium.
 
C.  increase strategic focus. 
 
D.  decrease strategic focus. 
 
The Merger and Acquisition Lifecycle 
1.39 Generally major mergers have 
A.   no definable lifecycle.
 
B.   clear lifecycle stages although with random events.
 
C.   random lifecycle phases with no consistent sequence of events.
 
D.   clear lifecycle phases with a standard set of sub-phases and work packages. 
 
1.40 In terms of lifecycle phases 
I. inception usually comes right after feasibility. 
II. feasibility comes right before the deal. 
III. implementation comes right before commissioning. 
IV. contract formulation comes right after the deal. 
Which of the above is/are true? 
A.  I only.
 
B.  I and II.
 
C.  III only.
 
D.  IV only.
 

--- Page 49 ---
 
Module 1 / Introduction 
Mergers and Acquisitions   Edinburgh Business School 
1/29
Measuring the Success of Mergers and Acquisitions 
1.41 In terms of short-term financial gain by the acquirer, most mergers or acquisitions 
A.
are very successful. 
 
B.
are somewhat successful.
 
C. break even. 
 
D. fail.
 
1.42 Generally, in terms of short-term financial gains 
A.
acquirer shareholders make the most.
 
B.
target shareholders make the most. 
 
C. acquirer and target shareholders do equally well.
 
D. acquirer and target shareholders both lose small amounts. 
 
A Brief History of Mergers and Acquisitions 
1.43 Most analysts would agree that in business history (including the present wave) there 
have been 
A.
two major merger waves.
 
B.
three major merger waves.
 
C. four major merger waves.
 
D. five major merger waves.
 
1.44 The current globalisation wave is driven largely by the continued evolution of 
A.
transport systems. 
 
B.
language compatibility.
 
C. population growth. 
 
D. information technology and the Internet. 
 
1.45 The current globalisation wave has a number of drivers including 
I. sustained low interest rates. 
II. sustained low growth. 
III. supply exceeding demand in many industries. 
IV. the continued sustained development in computers, IT and the Internet. 
Which of the above is/are true? 
A.
I only.
 
B.
I and II. 
 
C. I, II and III. 
 
D. I, II, III and IV.
 
 

--- Page 50 ---
